Introducing Vector Semantic Search To Valkey (#276)
valkey-io/valkey-io.github.io: content/blog/2025-06-13-introducing-valkey-search/index.md

**Backward/Forward Compatibility:** Cluster upgrades or downgrades often result in a temporary mix of node versions. valkey-search seamlessly handles such scenarios with a serialization format based on [Protocol Buffers (Protobuf)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocol_Buffers), ensuring both backward and forward compatibility. This simplifies version transitions and reduces the chance of costly re-indexing.

## RediSearch API Compatibility

Valkey-search implements a subset of RediSearch’s functionality, with compatibility across key vector search APIs. This enables integration with most existing RediSearch client libraries, allowing you to continue using familiar tools. Developers already experienced with RediSearch can adopt valkey-search with minimal changes, as the vector search API remains largely consistent. 

## Performance & Low Latency

> Valkey-search was designed from the group up as an in-memory secondary index. A multi-threaded architecture optimizes query and mutation processing with minimal thread contention, enabling near-linear vertical scalability.

Reviewer: group -> ground

+++
title= "Introducing Vector Search To Valkey" 
description = "Learn how to build high-performance, reliable vector similarity search with valkey-search." 

> date= 2025-06-13 01:01:01 

Reviewer 2: I'll sync with you outside of github to find a good publishing date.

Hybrid queries are particularly powerful for real-world applications, where a mix of vector and non-vector attributes defines the relevance of results. For example, a numeric field could be used as a timestamp, meaning that search operations could be automatically confined to a particular period of time. Another example would be to use a tag field to indicate a language.

### Query Execution

When executing hybrid queries, valkey-search automatically selects from one of two strategies as part of the query execution planning phase. This is done by breaking down the query filter into predicates and estimating the selectivity of each predicate to estimate the least expensive execution strategy. 

**Pre-filtering:** This algorithm has two sequential steps: first, a temporary dataset is created using only the documents which pass the filter expression, then a linear KNN similarity search of is performed on the temporary dataset. Pre-filtering is particularly effective for high selectivity queries, i.e., the filter significantly narrows down the dataset.

> Pre-filtering is particularly effective for high selectivity queries, i.e., the filter significantly narrows down the dataset

Reviewer 2: Duplicated from line 80

Author: woops, good catch!

+++
title= "Introducing Vector Search To Valkey" 

> description = "Learn how to use valkey-search to search through billions of vectors with single-digit millisecond latencies and greater than 99% recall." 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description = "Learn how to use valkey-search to implement highly reliable vector similarity search." 

```

Based on another thread, I think we should split the performance from the use case. We can have a followup that details the performance characteristics.

Reviewer: I find the "high reliable" to be totally bland and a turn-off. It's worse than saying nothing.

Reviewer: Can we leverage some of the Valkey verbiage? Something like "Learn all about doing vector similarity search on Valkey, the worlds fastest xxxxx"  ?? Here the claim is for Valkey and VSS lives in the reflected glory.

Reviewer 3: We sometimes just say "Built for high-performance applications".

##### Query Execution

There are multiple strategies for executing hybrid queries, each suited to different use cases. Valkey-search automatically selects from two strategies as part of the query execution planning phase. This is done by breaking down the query filter into predicates and estimating the selectivity of each predicate to estimate the least expensive execution strategy. 

**Pre-filtering:** This algorithm has two sequential steps:
* First, a temporary dataset is created using only the documents which pass the filter expression. 
* Second, a linear `KNN` similarity search of the temporary dataset is performed.

Pre-filtering is particularly effective for high selectivity queries, i.e., the filter significantly narrows down the dataset

**Inline-filtering:** In this algorithm, filtering is done *during *the vector search itself. As the HNSW search graph is traversed, each candidate document is tested against the filter criteria before being added to the result set. This method is best suited for cases where the filter isn’t highly selective, i.e., the filter matches a large amount of the dataset. 

### High Availability

> Valkey-search is built on top of Valkey, leveraging its primary/replica-based architecture to provide high availability (HA). Diagram #2 shows a typical configuration of one primary and three replicas. In the event of a primary node failure, the system automatically promotes one of the replicas to become the new primary. Clients then automatically retry failing operations to the newly promoted primary, minimizing disruption.

Reviewer 3: > Clients then automatically retry failing operations to the newly promoted primary, minimizing disruption.

This is only sometimes true. Only idempotent commands can generally be retried.

Author: Sure, I'll remove this.

However, from a performance perspective, valkey-search behaves very differently from regular Valkey. The multi-threaded implementation of valkey-search means that additional CPUs yield up to linear increases in both query and ingestion throughput. Horizontal scaling (CME) yields linear increases in ingestion throughput but may provide little to no benefit on query throughput. If additional query throughput is required, scaling through replicas or additional CPUs is required.

![High availability](images/cluster.png)

### Snapshots

Valkey’s point-in-time RDB snapshotting mechanism is a key component for maintaining high availability, zero downtime, and minimal operational overhead. Beyond persistence and loading from disk snapshots, RDB plays a crucial role in full-sync operations, where a primary node synchronizes its in-memory data with a replica node in an HA setup. Full-sync is commonly triggered when a new replica joins the cluster but may also occur if a secondary falls too far behind due to prolonged lag.

valkey-search enhances Valkey snapshotting mechanism to include index definitions and vector indexes and is built for resilience and efficiency:

> **Instant Turn-up:** New nodes must become fully operational in minimal time. While rebuilding an index on startup is an option, ingesting a large volume of vectors can be prohibitively slow, delaying system readiness. A snapshot captures not only the index metadata but also the vector index content which significantly reduces downtime and operational burden.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Fast Turn-up:** New nodes must become fully operational in minimal time. While rebuilding an index on startup is an option, ingesting a large volume of vectors can be prohibitively slow, delaying system readiness. A snapshot captures not only the index metadata but also the vector index content which significantly reduces downtime and operational burden.
```
Will make a bunch of minor comments that try to avoid hyperbolic/marketing things. It's not instant, but it is fast.

> **Backward/Forward Compatibility:** Cluster upgrades or downgrades often result in a temporary mix of node versions. valkey-search seamlessly handles such scenarios with a serialization format based on Protocol Buffers (Protobuf), ensuring both backward and forward compatibility. This guarantees smooth version transitions without requiring costly re-indexing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Backward/Forward Compatibility:** Cluster upgrades or downgrades often result in a temporary mix of node versions. valkey-search seamlessly handles such scenarios with a serialization format based on Protocol Buffers (Protobuf), ensuring both backward and forward compatibility. This simplifies version transitions and reduces the chance of costly re-indexing.
```

## RediSearch API Compatibility

> Valkey-search implements a subset of RediSearch’s functionality, with strong compatibility across key vector search APIs. This enables integration with most existing RediSearch client libraries, allowing you to continue using familiar tools. Developers already experienced with RediSearch can adopt valkey-search with minimal changes, as the API remains largely consistent. This compatibility helps reduce adoption friction for teams and organizations building on Redis OSS-based solutions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Valkey-search implements a subset of RediSearch’s functionality, with compatibility across key vector search APIs. This enables integration with most existing RediSearch client libraries, allowing you to continue using familiar tools. Developers already experienced with RediSearch can adopt valkey-search with minimal changes, as the API remains largely consistent. This compatibility helps reduce adoption friction for teams and organizations building on Redis OSS-based solutions.
```
Do we have any documentation about the compatibility delta? There is just a lot of hedging in this paragraph.

## Performance & Low Latency

Valkey-search is designed as an in-memory secondary index, achieving exceptional performance. A multi-threaded architecture optimizes query and mutation processing with minimal thread contention, enabling near-linear vertical scalability.

At its core, valkey-search’s threading architecture follows a common design pattern: a worker thread pool combined with task queues. It employs advanced synchronization mechanisms to maintain index consistency while minimizing contention among worker threads. By time-slicing CPU access between read and write operations, the system enables an almost lock-free read path, delivering high performance and consistently low search latency. 

> Valley-search’s HNSW implementation is based on the OSS project [HNSWLib](https://github.com/nmslib/hnswlib). While HNSWLib is well-regarded for its speed, we have enhanced its performance, resiliency and its production maturity. These improvements include better `SIMD` utilization, promotion of CPU cache efficiency, memory utilization and more.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Valley-search’s HNSW implementation is based on the OSS project [HNSWLib](https://github.com/nmslib/hnswlib). While HNSWLib is well-regarded for its speed, we have enhanced its performance and efficiency for our use case. These improvements include better `SIMD` utilization, promotion of CPU cache efficiency, memory utilization and more.

```
I would prefer we not throw shade at other OSS projects. Performance is OK to work on, but we shouldn't call ours more production mature. I would also "prefer" we call out that we intend to contribute our work back, but I'm okay omitting that if we don't think we ever will.

## Future Enhancements

> This first release of valkey-search focuses on vector search, but it is designed as a general-purpose indexing subsystem. Future releases will extend both the available data types as well as provide post-query data processing facilities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This first release of valkey-search focuses on vector search, but it is designed as a general-purpose indexing subsystem. Future releases will extend both the available data types as well as provide post-query data processing facilities.

```
New data types?

In cluster mode, the `FT.CREATE` command can be sent to any primary shard of the cluster and the system will automatically distribute the new index definition to all cluster members. The distribution is done using a combination of the cluster bus and direct gRPC communication between nodes. In the rare case where the distribution machinery detects an inconsistency between nodes, a last-writer-wins (LWW) collision resolution protocol is invoked to enable eventual cluster-wide consistency. 

## Valkey-search Capabilities

### Query Pipeline

#### Vector Search Algorithms

Valkey-search supports K Nearest Neighbor (KNN) searching. Applications provide a reference vector and request that the system locate the K vectors which are closest to a supplied reference vector using the selected distance function (L2, IP or cosine). KNN searching is a classic problem which lacks an efficient exact ideal solution. Valkey-search addresses this problem by providing two different algorithms that the developer can select from:

The first algorithm performs an exhaustive linear search, providing exactly correct answers but with a run-time that may be intolerable on large data sets.

> The second algorithm addresses this problem by compromising on accuracy in exchange for superior run-times. In other words, it runs very fast but may not deliver exactly the correct answer. This type of algorithm is often known as Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN). The term "recall" is used to measure the quality of an ANN algorithm result and is expressed as the ratio (or percentage) of the found answers to the correct answers, e.g., a recall of 0.95 (or 95%) means that for a search with K = 100, 95 of the correct answers were found. There is a tradeoff between the recall of an ANN algorithm and its time/space resource consumption.

Author: No, this refers specifically to the ANN algorithm, where the behavior is controlled by the HNSW configuration

Clients must send data mutation (write) commands to the primary node which are executed and then automatically asynchronously transmitted to each replica. Clients can send data read operations to any node in the cluster, recognizing that reading from a replica delivers a result reflecting a historical point in time.

When Valkey-search is used, each node, whether a primary or a replica, builds and maintains its own indexes. No additional traffic on the replication channel is generated for index maintenance. Search query operations sent to a replica will be executed against its indexes, reflecting the historical point in time of the data within that node.

![High availability](images/ha.png)

### Scaling

Valkey-search supports all three methods of scaling: horizontal, vertical and replicas. When scaling for capacity, valkey-search behaves just like regular Valkey, i.e., increasing the memory of individual nodes (vertical scaling) or increasing the number of shards (horizontal scaling) will increase the overall capacity.

> However, from a performance perspective, valkey-search behaves very differently from regular Valkey. The multi-threaded implementation of valkey-search means that additional CPUs yield up to linear increases in both query and ingestion throughput. Horizontal scaling (CME) yields linear increases in ingestion throughput but may provide little to no benefit on query throughput. If additional query throughput is required, scaling through replicas or additional CPUs is required.

Author: Just removing this.

![High availability](images/cluster.png)

### Snapshots

> Valkey’s point-in-time RDB snapshotting mechanism is a key component for maintaining high availability, zero downtime, and minimal operational overhead. Beyond persistence and loading from disk snapshots, RDB plays a crucial role in full-sync operations, where a primary node synchronizes its in-memory data with a replica node in an HA setup. Full-sync is commonly triggered when a new replica joins the cluster but may also occur if a secondary falls too far behind due to prolonged lag.

Author: Agreed that it's not valkey-search specific but I do see value in keeping this paragraph for folks who are less familiar with Valkey.

The Valkey project is introducing vector similarity search capabilities through [valkey-search](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-search) (BSD-3-Clause licensed), an official Valkey module compatible with Valkey versions 8.1.1 and above. 

> With valkey-search you can search through billions of vectors with single-digit millisecond latencies and greater than 99% recall. Whether you're building semantic search, fraud detection systems, or conversational AI experiences, valkey-search offers a performant and flexible foundation.

Reviewer 3: Without a real benchmark to back this up, I don't feel great saying this basically as our tagline.

Reviewer 4: I second this. Especially given that performance is the key competitive advantage.

Author: Summarizing a meeting discussion with Allen and Madelyn:
Ideally, the benchmarks would include comparative results against leading vector databases. However, due to publishing constraints from both GCP and AWS, a more practical path forward may be to have these numbers shared by an external blogger. As a result, this blog post will focus primarily on the functionality.

In this blog, you'll learn how valkey-search works, explore key use cases it supports, understand its architecture and indexing model, and see how to integrate it into your own applications. You'll also gain insight into how it scales, ensures high availability, and supports hybrid queries that combine vector similarity with structured filtering.

## Semantic Search

The ability of AI models to extract semantic meaning enables new classes of searching algorithms, collectively known as semantic search. An AI model can process an input and convert it into a single high-dimension numeric vector – known as an embedding. Inputs with similar meaning will have similar embeddings. Semantic search is the process of converting a query into its embedding and searching a database of embeddings to find the embeddings that are most alike. 

The semantic search process can be divided into three phases:

> * **Encode**:  First, convert your input data into searchable units known as chunks. Chunking strategies are data-type specific. For example, with text one well-known chunking algorithm is to make each sentence be a chunk. Then use an AI model to  generate an embedding for each chunk. The specific AI model used for encoding depends on the data type and specific use case. Many AI models are available as a service, such as Google Cloud’s [VertexAI](https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=na-US-all-en-dr-bkws-all-all-trial-e-dr-1710134&utm_content=text-ad-none-any-DEV_c-CRE_727566102146-ADGP_Hybrid+%7C+BKWS+-+MIX+%7C+Txt-AI+and+Machine+Learning-AI+and+ML+General-KWID_43700081235816807-kwd-553582750299&utm_term=KW_vertex%20ai-ST_vertex+ai&gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQjwt8zABhDKARIsAHXuD7bx87RdKGwa0aI65EGd09BIBUVJLBS_G0D9CYrubsIQObu2O62k6_0aAnmFEALw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds) or AWS’ [Bedrock](https://aws.amazon.com/bedrock/), simplifying the embedding generation process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Encode**:  First, convert your input data into searchable units known as chunks. Chunking strategies are data-type specific. For example, with text one well-known chunking algorithm is to make each sentence be a chunk. Then use an AI model to  generate an embedding for each chunk. The specific AI model used for encoding depends on the data type and specific use case. Many AI models are available as a service, such as Google Cloud’s [VertexAI](https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai) or AWS’ [Bedrock](https://aws.amazon.com/bedrock/), simplifying the embedding generation process.

```

## Future Enhancements

This first release of valkey-search focuses on vector search, but it is designed as a general-purpose indexing subsystem. Future releases will extend both the available data types as well as provide post-query data processing facilities.

## Get Involved

Valkey-search is open source and ready for you to explore. Whether you're building cutting-edge AI applications or integrating vector search into existing systems, we invite you to try it out. The easiest way to get started is by visiting the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-search), where you'll find setup instructions, documentation, and examples.

We welcome contributions of all kinds - code, documentation, testing, and feedback. Join the community, file issues, open pull requests, or suggest improvements. Your involvement helps make valkey-search better for everyone.

> Ready to dive in? Clone the repo, fire up the dev container, and start building high-performance vector search with valkey-search.

Reviewer 3: We should probably link the dev container here.

## About the Authors

<table>
  <tr>
   <td>
     
![Yair Gottdenker](images/yair.png)

   </td>
   <td>

### Yair Gottdenker

Yair Gottdenker is a Senior Staff Software Engineer at Memorystore GCP. 
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>
     
![Allen Samuels](images/Allen.png)

   </td>
   <td>
     
### Allen Samuels 
 
Allen Samuels is a Principal Engineer at AWS.
   </td>
  </tr>

> </table>

Reviewer 3: This is part of the metadata that should be embedded. See https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-io.github.io/blob/2b956fa82d018c0f96d2cb384dddce50543a6fb5/content/blog/2024-08-29-valkey-memory-efficiency-8-0.md?plain=1#L1 for how it's done.

For a full example you can look at https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-io.github.io/commit/837e250c9f361222e16060771da1a5a4a410260b
